add DSP RTL library use for FPGA (#2)
juny-lim/oneAPI-samples-fork: DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Tools/use_rtl_dsp/README.md

> # Using RTL with customised DSP Block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `Use RTL with customized DSP Block` Sample
```

This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build SYCL device libraries from RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design.

> | Optimized for                     | Description
> |:---                               |:---
> | OS                                | 
> | Hardware                          | Intel® Agilex® 7, Arria® 10, and Stratix® 10 FPGAs
> | Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler
> | What you will learn               | How to integrate customised DSP block RTL into your oneAPI program and emulate it using a C model, as well as pulling the RTL directly into your full system design.
> | Time to complete                  | 30 minutes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Area                  | Description
|:---                   |:---
| What you will learn   | How to integrate customised DSP block RTL into your oneAPI program and emulate it using a C model, as well as pulling the RTL directly into your full system design.
| Time to complete      | 30 minutes
| Category              | Concepts and Functionality
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Purpose

This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to allow DSP customisation in RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design. A RTL library can be used to customize DSP block behaviour, leading to embedding high performance FPGA code, handwritten in Verilog into your oneAPI program.
```

> > **Note**: Even though the Intel DPC++/C++ OneAPI compiler is enough to compile for emulation, generating reports and generating RTL, there are extra software requirements for the simulation flow and FPGA compiles.
> >
> > For using the simulator flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition and one of the following simulators must be installed and accessible through your PATH:
> > - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition
> > - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Starter Edition
> > - ModelSim® SE
> >
> > When using the hardware compile flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition must be installed and accessible through your PATH.
> >
> > :warning: Make sure you add the device files associated with the FPGA that you are targeting to your Intel® Quartus® Prime installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites

| Optimized for       | Description
|:---                 |:---
| OS                  | Ubuntu* 18.04/20.04 <br> RHEL*/CentOS* 8 <br> SUSE* 15 <br> Windows* 10
| Hardware            | Intel® Agilex® 7, Arria® 10, and Stratix® 10 FPGAs
| Software            | Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler

> **Note**: Even though the Intel DPC++/C++ OneAPI compiler is enough to compile for emulation, generating reports and generating RTL, there are extra software requirements for the simulation flow and FPGA compiles.
>
> For using the simulator flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition and one of the following simulators must be installed and accessible through your PATH:
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Starter Edition
> - ModelSim® SE
>
> When using the hardware compile flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition must be installed and accessible through your PATH.

> **Warning** Make sure you add the device files associated with the FPGA that you are targeting to your Intel® Quartus® Prime installation.
```

> :warning: When targeting an IP-only flow, the RTL library feature will not work when compiling to Quartus and will error out in the late-stage compile. RTL libraries will work in the simulation flow. This will be fixed in a future release. This is documented in the [compiler release notes](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/release-notes/intel-oneapi-dpc-c-compiler-release-notes.html).

> ## Prerequisites
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: is there any particular reason of removing the Prerequisites title? I see that other code sample still has this section remained.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
   tier1("Tier 1: Get Started")
   tier2("Tier 2: Explore the Fundamentals")
   tier3("Tier 3: Explore the Advanced Techniques")
   tier4("Tier 4: Explore the Reference Designs")

   tier1 --> tier2 --> tier3 --> tier4

   style tier1 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier2 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier3 fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier4 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
```

Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.

> ## Purpose
> 
> This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to allow DSP customisation in RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design. A RTL library can be used to customize DSP block behaviour, leading to embedding high performance FPGA code, handwritten in Verilog into your oneAPI program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Use of RTL libraries in SYCL

Reviewer 2: can you include a schematic diagram explaining why your kernel has 4 pipe interfaces?

Author: will come back to look at this after resolving other comment on .cpp file since there is a suggestion to use 2 input pipes and 1 output pipes for each kernel

> Prior to this tutorial, tutorial [Using FPGA Cross-Language Libraries](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples/tree/master/DirectProgramming/C%2B%2BSYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Tools/use_library) demostrated how to generate static library from an RTL source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to this tutorial, tutorial [Using FPGA Cross-Language Libraries](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples/tree/master/DirectProgramming/C%2B%2BSYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Tools/use_library) demonstrated how to generate static library from an RTL source.
```

> Files need to create SYCL target library from RTL source include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files needed to create a SYCL target library from RTL source include:
```

- Verilog, System Verilog, or VHDL files that define the RTL component

> - An Object Manifest File (.xml) which contains properties need to integrate RTL component into SYCL pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An Object Manifest File (.xml) which contains properties needed to integrate RTL component into SYCL pipeline
```

- A header file containing valid SYCL kernel language and declares the signatures of functions implemented by the RTL component.
- A SYCL based emulation model file for RTL component

> The RTL is used when compiling for the hardware whereas the emulation model is used when the oneAPI program is run on the FPGA emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RTL is used when compiling for hardware whereas the emulation model is used when the oneAPI program is run on the FPGA emulator.
```

> After having the library file, the function in the library can be called from SYCL kernel, without need to know the hardware design or implementation details on underlying functions in the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having created the library file, the function in the library can be called from the SYCL kernel, without the need to know the hardware design or implementation details on underlying functions in the library.
```

Refer to the tutorial [Using FPGA Cross-Language Libraries](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples/tree/master/DirectProgramming/C%2B%2BSYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Tools/use_library) for more details.

> Given an workable RTL module that you has been using or verified, you might need to add a few tweak in order to integrate the RTL into oneAPI program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given a workable RTL module, one may need to apply some modifications in order to integrate it into oneAPI program.
```

1. An RTL module must use a single input Avalon® streaming interface. 

>     Besides RTL library's interface, you must include a clock port, a resetn port, and Avalon® streaming interface input and output ports (that is, ivalid, ovalid, iready, oready) into your RTL module. Name the ports as specified here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Besides RTL library's interface, you must include a `clock` port, a `resetn` port, and Avalon® streaming interface input and output ports (that is: `ivalid`, `ovalid`, `iready`, `oready`) into your RTL module. 
```

>     > **Note**: The signal names must match the ones specified in the .xml file. An error occurs during library creation if a signal name is inconsistent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note**: The signal names must match the ones specified in the .xml file. An error occurs during library creation if a signal name is inconsistent.
```

> 2. RTL library’s characteristics needs to be specified. For example, this tutorial RTL library has specified latency value, that needs to be specified in object manifest file (.xml) under ATTRIBUTES. For other ATTRIBUTES-specific elements, do refer to [Object Manifest File Syntax of an RTL Module](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-1/object-manifest-file-syntax-of-an-rtl-library.html) for additional information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. RTL library’s characteristics needs to be specified. For example, this tutorial RTL library has specified the latency of the RTL component, that needs to be specified in object manifest file (.xml) under ATTRIBUTES. For other ATTRIBUTES-specific elements, do refer to [Object Manifest File Syntax of an RTL Module](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-1/object-manifest-file-syntax-of-an-rtl-library.html) for additional information.
```

    > **Note**: It is challenging to debug an RTL module that works correctly on its own but works incorrectly as part of a SYCL kernel. Double-check all parameters under the ATTRIBUTES element in the object manifest file (.xml).

> ## Building the `use_rtl_dsp` Tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build the `use_rtl_dsp` Sample
```

> > **Note**: When working with the command-line interface (CLI), you should configure the oneAPI toolkits using environment variables.
> > Set up your CLI environment by sourcing the `setvars` script located in the root of your oneAPI installation every time you open a new terminal window.
> > This practice ensures that your compiler, libraries, and tools are ready for development.
> >
> > Linux*:
> > - For system wide installations: `. /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> > - For private installations: ` . ~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> > - For non-POSIX shells, like csh, use the following command: `bash -c 'source <install-dir>/setvars.sh ; exec csh'`
> >
> > Windows*:
> > - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> > - Windows PowerShell*, use the following command: `cmd.exe "/K" '"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" && powershell'`
> >
> > For more information on configuring environment variables, see [Use the setvars Script with Linux* or macOS*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html) or [Use the setvars Script with Windows*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note**: When working with the command-line interface (CLI), you should configure the oneAPI toolkits using environment variables. Set up your CLI environment by sourcing the `setvars` script in the root of your oneAPI installation every time you open a new terminal window. This practice ensures that your compiler, libraries, and tools are ready for development.
>
> Linux*:
> - For system wide installations: `. /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For private installations: ` . ~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For non-POSIX shells, like csh, use the following command: `bash -c 'source <install-dir>/setvars.sh ; exec csh'`
>
> Windows*:
> - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> - Windows PowerShell*, use the following command: `cmd.exe "/K" '"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" && powershell'`
>
> For more information on configuring environment variables, see [Use the setvars Script with Linux* or macOS*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html) or [Use the setvars Script with Windows*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).

```

### On a Linux* System

> 1. Generate the `Makefile` by running `cmake`.
> 
>     ```bash
>     mkdir build
>     cd build
>     ```
> 
>     To compile for the default target (the Agilex® 7 device family), run `cmake` using the command:
>     ```
>     cmake ..
>     ```
> 
>     > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
>     >  ```
>     >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
>     >  ```
>     >
>     > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
>     >  ```
>     >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
>     >  ```
>     >
>     > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.
> 
> 2. Compile the design through the generated `Makefile`. The following build targets are provided, matching the recommended development flow:
> 
>    * Compile for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulated FPGA device):
> 
>       ```bash
>       make fpga_emu
>       ```
> 
>    * Generate the optimization report:
> 
>      ```bash
>      make report
>      ```
> 
>    * Compile for FPGA Simulator
> 
>      ```bash
>      make fpga_sim
>      ```
> 
>    * Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device):
> 
>      ```bash
>      make fpga
>      ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Change to the sample directory.
2. Build the program for Intel® Agilex® 7 device family, which is the default.
   ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake ..
   ```
   > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
   >  ```
   >
   > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
   >  ```
   >
   > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.

3. Compile the design. (The provided targets match the recommended development flow.)

   1. Compile and run for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulates an FPGA device).
      ```
      make fpga_emu
      ```
   2. Generate the HTML optimization reports. (See [Read the Reports](#read-the-reports) below for information on finding and understanding the reports.)
      ```
      make report
      ```
   3. Compile for simulation (fast compile time, targets simulated FPGA device).
      ```
      make fpga_sim
      ```
   4. Compile and run on FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets an FPGA device).
      ```
      make fpga
      ```
````

    ```
    cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" ..
    ```
    > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
    >  ```
    >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
    >  ```
    >
    > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
    >  ```
    >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
    >  ```
    >
    > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.

2. Compile the design through the generated `Makefile`. The following build targets are provided, matching the recommended development flow:

   - Compile for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulated FPGA device):

     ```
     nmake fpga_emu
     ```

   - Generate the optimization report:

     ```
     nmake report
     ```

   - Compile for simulation (fast compile time, targets simulated FPGA device, reduced problem size):

     ```
     nmake fpga_sim
     ```

   - Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device):

     ```
     nmake fpga

>      ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Change to the sample directory.
2. Build the program for the Intel® Agilex® 7 device family, which is the default.
   ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" ..
   ```
   > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
   >  ```
   >
   > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
   >  ```
   >
   > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.

3. Compile the design. (The provided targets match the recommended development flow.)

   1. Compile for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulated FPGA device).
      ```
      nmake fpga_emu
      ```
   2. Generate the optimization report. (See [Read the Reports](#read-the-reports) below for information on finding and understanding the reports.)
      ```
      nmake report
      ```
   3. Compile for simulation (fast compile time, targets simulated FPGA device, reduced problem size).
      ```
      nmake fpga_sim
      ```
   4. Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device):
      ```
      nmake fpga
      ```
> **Note**: If you encounter any issues with long paths when compiling under Windows*, you may have to create your ‘build’ directory in a shorter path, for example c:\samples\build.  You can then run cmake from that directory, and provide cmake with the full path to your sample directory.
````

> ## Running the Sample

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run the `use_rtl_dsp` Sample
```

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU):

     ```bash
     ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga_emu     (Linux)
     use_rtl_dsp.fpga_emu.exe   (Windows)
     ```

2. Run the sample on the FPGA simulator device

    * On Linux
        ```bash
        CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1 ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga_sim
        ```
    * On Windows
        ```bash
        set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1
        use_rtl_dsp.fpga_sim.exe
        set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=
        ```

3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`):

     ```bash
     ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga         (Linux)
     use_rtl_dsp.fpga.exe       (Windows)

>      ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
### On Linux

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga_emu
   ```
2. Run the sample of the FPGA simulator device (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1 ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga_sim
   ```
3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`).
   ```
   ./use_rtl_dsp.fpga
   ```

### On Windows

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   use_rtl_dsp.fpga_emu.exe
   ```
2. Run the sample of the FPGA simulator device (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1
   use_rtl_dsp.fpga_sim.exe
   set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=
   ```
3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`).
   ```
   use_rtl_dsp.fpga.exe
   ```
````

### Example of Output

```bash
PASSED: result (13421772700) is correct!
```

## Examining the Reports

> All compiler area estimation tools assume that the RTL module area is 0. The compiler does not currently support specifying an area model for RTL modules.

Reviewer 2: i do not believe this is true anymore: you can pass area estimates for RTL blocks and I've seen them reflected in the reports.

we should also show how the area utilization or latency is different between the naive and RTL-library version of the design.

Author: i verified that we can specify area estimate usage under RESOURCES attribute in xml file, and the value shows up in report. What if we dont give resource estimate in xml file? I remember the report shows 0 DSP when i compile this code.

Author: I will double confirm on report view of area estimation (and latency) different for both kernel before I write up into this readme.
